# Visualising the Catalogues of Digital Editions

## Introduction

Digital scholarly editions (DSE) are essential to arts and humanities research, but also, society and culture at large. They are the primary instrument through which textual and cultural heritage, expert knowledge, and public understanding are negotiated. Scholarly editions make documentary materials reliable, adhering to established editorial standards and rigorous intellectual practices to ensure that cultural artefacts are compiled and represented in a fashion that can be considered authoritative. 

DSEs are among the earliest projects in a field that used to be described as humanities computing and is currently mostly referred to as digital humanities (Dalbello 2011). This makes them especially suited for a diachronic approach, describing their change over time. While digital editions can vary greatly in scope and lifespan, a quantitative analysis of two of the most comprehensive data sources on digital editions can produce data-based insight into the developments within the field over time. This longitudinal approach to DSEs also means that historically successful formats for editions will shape the dataset and respective metadata. In practice, this means that most of the editions in the data sources will be based on or modelled after critical editions of text. 

Digital editions are positioned between drawing from archived material, and being an archive themselves (Dillen 2019, 266). In addition to that, digital editions also are web resources in need of archiving, lest they fall subject to link rot and very soon disappear from the web either for the lack of a persistent identifier or lack of maintenance. For digital editions past and present, two main data sources are available. Patrick Sahle lists around 800 editions in a curated catalogue (Sahle 2020), while the Catalogue of Digital Editions features about 320 digital editions in a database (Franzini 2012). Both sources have different criteria for inclusion, overlap in content and differ in granularity, yet these are the sources from which a history of DSEs will mostly draw. Analysis of these sources will present them in their scope, aim and usability for research, while highlighting underrepresented areas of data collection on digital scholarly editions.

DSE in the context of this paper are best defined using Patrick Sahle’s definition of editions as the “critical representation of historic documents'' (Sahle 2016). This definition is best suited for the editions described in both data sources, as Sahle compiled the first list of digital editions and the Dig-Ed-Cat explicitly refers to Sahle’s work as the basis of their data collection. These data sources from part of a response to Joris van Zundert, who calls on theorists and practitioners to “intensify the methodological discourse” necessary to “implement a form of hypertext that truly represents textual fluidity and text relations in a scholarly viable and computational tractable manner” (2016: 106) “Without that dialogue,” he warns, “we relegate the raison d’être for the digital scholarly edition to that of a mere medium shift, we limit its expressiveness to that of print text, and we fail to explore the computational potential for digital text representation, analysis and interaction.” This dialogue has begun in earnest (Driscoll and Pierazzo 2016; Boot et al. 2017), but a previous survey on the expectations and use of digital editions found that user needs are seldom satisfied by such resources (Franzini, Terras, and Mahony 2019). This dialogue can be augmented by the availability of data-driven insight into the development of digital scholarly editions over time, as well as an assessment of the scope and potential use of data sources for research on digital editions.

Digital editions have a long history of adapting to new challenges and possibilities presented by both changes in computational methods and research policy. While earlier DSEs were distributed through physical media, such as a CD-ROM sold through a publisher, digital platforms and browser-based access has become the standard practice for digital scholarly editions. With recent changes in EU funding directives, the majority of recent digital editions are based on open access models, further increasing accessibility of digital editions. Similarly, digital platforms providing metadata about digital editions can extend the accessibility of scholarly editing by providing the data from which to construct a history of digital scholarly editing and editions.

Exploring this history and at the same time assessing the available metadata on DSEs is the aim of this section. It presents the state of the two most comprehensive available sources on digital editions and details the methodology and visualisation process undertaken. This section is part of the larger C21 Editions project , a three-year international collaboration jointly funded by the Arts & Humanities Research Council (AH/W001489/1) and Irish Research Council (IRC/W001489/1). 

## Methodology

### Data sources on DSEs

Metadata on DSEs is primarily available through the [“Catalogue of Digital Editions”](https://dig-ed-cat.acdh.oeaw.ac.at/) (Dig-Ed-Cat). It incorporates other sources such as [Patrick Sahle’s list of DSEs](https://www.digitale-edition.de/exist/apps/editions-browser/index.html), and provides new data fields. This makes the Dig-Ed-Cat a key resource for a quantitative analysis of DSEs over time, with the project itself providing multiple ways to access and query the data. The Catalogue also fulfils a second, but equally important function: Through syndication with the German Datenbank-Infosystem [Database information system] [(DBIS)](https://dbis.ur.de/index.php?bib_id=alle&colors=3&ocolors=40&ref=about), DSEs listed in the Digt-Ed-Cat are discoverable resources for subscribing libraries. This greatly adds to the findability and impact of listed DSEs and is an important step in the integration of DSEs with other academic resources 

The common source of both catalogues can be traced back to a list of digital editions Patrick Sahle compiled in 1997[^1]. Continuously updating the list, Sahle would expand the catalogue to a list of currently 714 editions. In a comment on the collection, Sahle explains his motivation for compiling the list:

>Since most digital editions don't really fit into the traditional bibliographic model, usually there are no bibliographic library records available for them. We try to create bibliographic-like data as far as possible by collecting names of general editors, places of (virtual) publishing, publishing institutions, years of publishing and ISBN-numbers and other identifiers (where available) to help make these editions identifiable and referenceable. Whenever possible, we use snippets of self-description from the web pages of the editions as comments. Otherwise, there are edition descriptions from my (Patrick's) point of view. This is particularly the case for the oldest entries. Remember: some entries go back to the late 90s, early 00s and the concept of self description by quotation only started in 2008. (Sahle 2020)

This aim of increasing discoverability of digital editions in the light of poor bibliographic records for such works (Expressed in both the 2008 and 2020 version of the catalogue) is again found in the Dig-Ed-Cat’s syndication of editions to increase discoverability through library catalogues. Sahle’s list is compiled by himself and updated irregularly. Regarding data bias, Sahle explains:

>What I see is what you get. I am currently professor for Digital Humanities, affiliated to a history department at Wuppertal University, Germany. I have a background in (medieval) history and historical and humanities methodologies at large. Therefore, German editions will inevitably be overrepresented as well as historical editions, editions from Europe, and editions documented in Western languages. You can improve this situation by indicating underrepresented types of editions. (ibid)

This data bias is also found in the Dig-Ed-Cat, where the authors explain that a lack of a Asian or African digital editions in the catalogue is due to the project team not being able to evaluate these editions. Instead, users are invited to submit entries on editions from the global South.[^2] With both data sources, it must be considered that the data held is largely focussed on European projects.

### Structure

Both data sources are different in structure and granularity. Sahle describes his catalogue not using a controlled vocabulary, and few categories (Title, Subject Area, Language, Material, Period). Additionally, each entry has a description/comment and a link to the edition or publisher. Sahle deliberately does not remove inactive projects[^3] (though it is not clear if and when broken links are removed or updated). 
The Dig-Ed-Cat self-describes as a data agglomerator which again is connected to the Linked Open Data cloud to promote discoverability. Consequently, Dig-Ed-Cat features a much more granular approach to DSEs, including some fields with linked data vocabularies.[^4] Dig-Ed-Cat is designed as a participatory project, and users can submit new entries through the project’s github page. One of the data fields in the Dig-Ed-Cat is availability, indicating that inactive projects remain part of the data, however it seems that this value does not update automatically based on, say, the HTTP status of the URL. As part of the granular approach and voluntary contributions from the DSE community, some fields concerning funding source and amount per project are seldom filled out. The analysis in this paper will largely be based on the granular data available through the Dig-Ed-Cat, especially with regards to longitudinal developments in the field.

### Data Access

Dig-Ed-Cat being a data agglomerator and data source, it features convenient access to underlying data. While the project homepage features extensive data visualisations and a SPARQL endpoint[^5], it also provides Open Access to the underlying data which can be accessed in .csv format. 
Sahle’s catalogue - referring here to version 4.0, released in 2020 - also has made available its data source[^6]. The data is structured in TEI-XML and can be translated into a dataframe or .csv file for a quantitative analysis.[^7] Before version 4.0, the website itself could be scraped for edition data, although this includes somewhat more effort especially in regards to data cleaning.

### Analysis

With the data available, the main objective of the analysis is to produce a longitudinal analysis of DSEs within the scope and constraints of the respective data sources. In most cases, the more granular Dig-Ed-Cat is the preferred source (especially since Dig-Ed-Cat provides an end date field indicating the actual or envisioned end of the active development), while in some cases the larger data source provided by Sahle yields more conclusive results. Acknowledging the bias and limitations in both sources, the aim of this analysis as a whole is to understand long-term developments within the field of DSE and at the same time show the value of comprehensive data sources on digital editions for research purposes.

<!-- Footnotes -->
[^1]: See (https://v3.digitale-edition.de/vlet-about.html) "I've been interested in digital scholarly editing roughly since 1994. I still try to keep an eye on the ongoing developments in this area and I continuously collect hints on digital editions. This list is replacing my Virtual Library Page on "(Digitale) Editionstechnik" from the year 2000 which I retrospectively would call Version 2.0. There were even earlier lists from 1998 and 1997 which I now call V1.0 and V0.8 respectively."
[^2]: See the [FAQ section of the Dig-Ed-Cat](https://dig-ed-cat.acdh.oeaw.ac.at/faq/).
[^3]: Explained in the [about section of Version 4.0](https://www.digitale-edition.de/exist/apps/editions-browser/about.html), see Sahle (2020).
[^4]: “The data in the Catalogue is being hooked up to the [Linked Open Data (LOD)](http://programminghistorian.org/lessons/intro-to-linked-data) cloud to increase discoverability while supporting semantic integration and knowledge sharing. The linked data vocabularies currently connected to the Catalogue are [W3C Basic Geo](https://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/), [FOAF](http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/#), [GeoNames](http://www.geonames.org/ontology#), [Data Catalog](http://www.w3.org/ns/dcat#) and [Dublin Core Metadata](http://purl.org/dc/terms/). Institution data also links to [DNB (Deutsche Nationalbibliothek)](http://www.dnb.de/DE/Home/home_node.html) Catalogue IDs.” (“Acdh-Oeaw/Dig_Ed_Cat: Release For Zenodo” 2018)
[^5]: [SPARQL](https://www.ontotext.com/knowledgehub/fundamentals/what-is-sparql/) is a semantic query language for databases, allowing users to run custom queries on the Dig-Ed-Cat database.
[^6]: (https://git.uni-wuppertal.de/dhsfu/sde-catalog)
[^7]:  For a detailed description of this process, the section on availability. <!-- Insert Link -->
